This tutorial will be one of the biggest. In it we will add the ability to select a level in the main menu.
I have added some images in advance. One of them is called Frame. This frame will be displayed
around the selected level and also added three pictures that will symbolize three
different levels. But so far they do not carry any semantic load - these are just screenshots from our test level.
So, let's create a new widget. We call it WBP_LevelItem. This widget will represent
one tile for level selection. Open this asset. This widget will have several elements.
We will need to group them by layers. We need a UI element that we already know.
It's called Overlay. Add it to the element tree and set SizeToContent to true.
We need an Image element. In the first image, we will keep a frame to
represent the highlighted level. In the property Image, set the Frame texture.
In the second image, we will store a texture that is a preview of our level.
Let's select any of the added pictures for each of the images and align in the middle.
Next, we need a text block that will display the name of the level.
Let's align the text to the lower left edge. I also selected an adequate value for the indents:
25, 2, 4, 20
We also need a button element in order to respond to click events.
Add it to the topmost layer. We do the alignment. We fill the space in width and height.
Find a property called RenderOpacity. It is responsible for the alpha of the UI element. We'll set it to 0
and the button will just be transparent. And also set the cursor to hand.
For the Frame image, we can set the default Visibility value to Hidden.
The visual part of the widget is ready. Let's see how it will be added to the menu widget.
Go to the content browser. Open the widget menu. We will dynamically add a LevelItem to a horizontal box,
which we will place under the Main Menu heading. We'll also add another Spacer to separate the horizontal box from the button.
By analogy, as we did the statistics table, we will dynamically
add LevelItem widgets to the horizontal box and very soon we will create an array of levels,
which will store all the data we need. We will create the logic for adding LevelItem in the widget menu.
Our widget is quite simple, but if the functionality in this widget increases,
then I recommend adding LevelItem not to the horizontal box, but to create a special widget.
Call it, for example, LevelSelector and encapsulate the logic for creating a LevelItem inside this widget, and in the main menu,
just insert a whole widget in the middle. Let's create a C ++ class for LevelItem.
We inherit the class from UserWidget.
We name the class STULevelItemWidget.
Click on create class. We start with the CoreTypes header file. We need an additional structure
in which all the data for the LevelItem will be stored. We create a structure.
We call it FLevelData.
Copy the property macro, the categories will also be game.
The first field of the structure will be of type FName.
It will contain the name of the level LevelName, the default can be set to None.
The second field of the structure will also have the FName type, it will store the name of the level that we want to display
in our LevelItem, that is, there can be one level name. It is directly responsible
for loading the map, and for display we can use any other string literal.
The third field of the structure is a pointer to the texture. In this field we will store a picture
for displaying in a LevelItem. We call the property LevelThumb, from the word thumbnail.
We also need a new delegate that will pass data from LevelItem to MainMenu. We will
understand which level is chosen. We name the signature FOnLevelSelectedSignature.
The parameter will be of type FLevelData. Let's indicate it by a constant link. Moving on. Move
to the GameInstance header file. Let's include the header file CoreTypes. We need the FLevelData type.
We need a property in which we will set up all the data
for the levels of our game. This will be an array of type FLevelData.
Let's call it LevelsData. We will no longer configure StartupLevelName manually.
This will happen automatically depending on which element of the
array is selected. Therefore, it is reasonable to remove this variable in the private section.
Let the variable type be FLevelData.
Change the gettter function.
We also need a setter function that will set the value of this variable.
And also a function is needed that will return the LevelsData value. It is more correct to return a
given value by a constant reference, so as not to copy the entire array. We will not use this optimization now
, so as not to clutter up the code. So the lesson will be big enough.
GameInstance has been sorted out as well. In the GameInstance blueprint, we will set up all the data for our levels.
Property of the menu name has not changed, and the variable with the level data that we
will load has private access. It will be installed automatically in our code.
Copy the STUCoreTypes header file and go to LevelItemWidget.
Add the heading STUCoreTypes. We need several forward declarations: a button, a
text block,
and an image class. In the protected section, we will create all the properties for the elements of our widget.
The first property is of type UButton. We name it LevelSelectButton.
The next property is LevelNameTextBlock.
Next, we create a property for the level picture. We name it LevelImage.
And the last property is a picture for the frame. We name it FrameImage.
As usual, we need the NativeOnInitialized function.
Next, we create a private section. We need a variable of the FLevelData type, which will refer
directly to this LevelItem, that is, we will set the LevelData to this widget.
A callback function is required, which will be called when the LevelSelectButton button is clicked.
Let's call it OnLevelItemClicked. We create a public section.
Let's add a delegate with the type we created in STUCoreTypes.
Let's call it OnLevelSelected.
And we also need public methods. The first one will be called SetLevelData.
When creating this widget in the method, we will set the data corresponding to it.
We also need a getter function that will return the stored data in the widget.
And we also have a function that will be called SetSelected. It will have one parameter,
with the help of which we will understand whether this widget is selected or not. And depending on the value of the parameter,
make the FrameImage visible or invisible. Let's create a body for each function in a .cpp file.
Let's include the header files that we need,
and we need the header files for the UI elements that we use in this widget: a button, a
text block and a picture. In the initialization function, add a callback for the LevelSelectButton button.
When we click on the button, the OnLevelItemClicked function is called. The function code is quite simple.
In it, we will call the OnLevelSelected delegate. Broadcast and transmit LevelData.
In the SetLevelData function, at the very beginning, we need
to assign the LevelData variable the value of the Data parameter of the function.
Then we update the value in the text block.
We call the function text of the SetText block. The parameter type of the FText function,
therefore, we need to convert a variable of the FName type to FText.
This can be done using the FText static function
called FromName. We pass the LevelDisplayName field of the object of our structure to the function.
And also set the image of the level.
We need a function of the UImage class called SetBrushFromTexture.
We pass into it the field of the object of our LevelThumb structure, which contains the pointer to the texture.
And the last function that we need to implement in this class is the SetSelected function.
Everything is simple here. We need to set the Visibility for the FrameImage depending on the IsSelected parameter.
It remains to write the code for creating the LevelItem in the menu widget. In the header file of the
widget menu, we also need STUCoreTypes. Copy the header file. We insert.
We need a forward declaration of the UHorizontalBox class.
We will add the created LevelItem widgets to the horizontal box.
A forward declaration of the USTUGameInstance class will be required.
And also a forward declaration for USTULevelItemWidget.
Add a property for the horizontal box.
Let's call it LevelItemsBox.
We also need a property that will store the class of the created widget.
Let's call it LevelItemWidgetClass.
Next, we need an array that will store pointers to the created widget objects.
The array item type will be USTULevelItemWidget.
Let's call the array LevelItemWidgets.
Also, in the private section, add a helper function called InitLevelItems. This function will be the main
logic for creating buttons-tiles of our levels. The next function is OnLevelSelected.
This function will be a callback function for the delegate that we created in the LevelItemWidget.
In fact, it will be called when we clicked on one of the level selection buttons.
Let's declare the last helper function.
It will return a pointer to our concrete USTUGameInstance class.
We create functions in a .cpp file.
The GetSTUGameInstance function can be placed at the very end of the file.
Let's start with her.
If the pointer to the world is null, then we return nullptr.
If not, then we return the pointer using the GetGameInstance template function.
Let's move on to the InitLevelItems function.
We will call it once in the NativeOnInitialized function. We can add this call right away.
Create a local variable that will hold a pointer to STUGameInstance.
If the pointer is null, then we immediately exit the function.
Next, let's check the assertion using the checkf macro.
Let me remind you that the first parameter is the condition that we want to check. Let's check
that the size of the level array is not 0. That is, we have data for at least one level.
Otherwise, our game is meaningless.
And the second parameter is a text message that is printed
if the condition is violated. We will display a message that the level array must not be empty.
We also forgot to include the header files. Let's include the header file HorizontalBox.
And the header file STULevelItemWidget.
Checking the LevelItemsBox pointer to nullptr.
If it is zero, then exit the function.
If everything is OK, then we call the ClearChildren function for clearing the child elements, otherwise,
suddenly, in the editor, someone added test tiles, as we actually did with you.
After that, we create a main loop in which we will iterate over all the elements of the LevelsData array.
We create a local variable, call it LevelItemWidget and assign the value to
this pointer, which is returned by the CreateWidget function and create a USTULevelItemWidget.
We pass the widget class as the second parameter.
If the pointer is null, then we call the continue operator.
If not, then we call the LevelItemWidget function, which is called SetLevelData
and pass the current element of the LevelData array. After that, subscribe to the OnLevelSelected delegate.
Next, the current LevelItemWidget must be added to the LevelItemsBox. We call the horizontal boxing function AddChild.
And we pass a pointer to the widget into it. We also add this pointer to the LevelItemWidgets widget array.
The logic for creating LevelItem widgets is ready. Let's now deal
with the OnLevelSelected function. We get into it when the user clicks on one of the tiles.
Let's create a local variable for STUGameInstance right away.
After we clicked on one of the LevelItem buttons, we must immediately change the value of the StartupLevel variable.
Therefore, we set the value of the start level in accordance with the data that came
when the delegate was called. After that, you can go through the entire array of widgets and determine which one has
now been selected. This is necessary in order to make visible or invisible the frame around the
picture with the image of the level. We will define this by the name of the level. In our case, this approach
will work, but in general it is possible to admit the situation that in any project a list is possible
in which several levels will have the same name. In this case, you need to create an additional variable,
for example, of type int32, which will unambiguously determine the level ID, and make a comparison using
this variable. Create local variable IsSelected. This variable will take on the
value true if the name of the level that came in the parameter is equal to the name of the level of the current element of the
array of our widgets. To get the level data, we created a special function GetLevelData.
And we call the SetSelected function, into which we pass this IsSelected variable.
Thus, the frame will be displayed only if we clicked on the button of this LevelItem.
Let's adjust the OnStartGame function according to our changes. We will also create a local variable STUGameInstance.
And pass the name of the Startup level to the OpenLevel function. We removed the check for None here.
In a couple of seconds we will understand why we did this. Go to the InitLevelItems function
and write the following code: if the Startup level is not set for us,
that is, the LevelName field is None,
then we can directly call the OnLevelSelected function and pass the first element of our levels array there.
This is safe because at this point in the code we are already sure that our array is not empty.
And if the name of the level is not None - this situation is possible, when we selected the level,
played the game and returned to the main menu, the initialization function was called
again in this widget , but StartupLevel is no longer None, so we can call the OnLevelSelected function
using StartupLevel. In fact, this is done in order to simply
highlight the given tile. The code for this tutorial is ready. Let's check that it compiles.
Let's start by replacing the parent class for LevelItemWidget.
We need to rename all the elements according to how we named them in the code.
Compile. All OK. Move to the blueprint menu.
Let's rename the horizontal box to LevelItemsBox.
Compile the widget. Let's create the simplest test levels to test the logic of our code. We add a new level.
We will distinguish them by a geometric object, for example, add a cube to this level.
Also, let's add some PlayerStarts to keep the characters from spawning at one point.
And in WorldSettings we set our game mode - BP_STUGameModeBase.
Save the level and name it CubeLevel.
Press Ctrl + W. We name the second level SphereLevel.
We open it and change the cube to a sphere.
We also save this level.
Go to GameInstance and let's populate our LevelsData array.
The name of the first level is TestLevel. This is our main level.
Write DeathMatch in DisplayName.
Add a texture named Level1.
The second level name will be SphereLevel.
In DisplayName, write Sphere.
Add a texture named Level2.
And the last level is CubeLevel.
In DisplayName, write Cube. Texture - Level3.
We compile the GameInstance blueprint.
Let's see what we've got. Open the menu level. Click play.
So we did not display anything.
We forgot to specify the LevelItemWidget class whose objects we want to create, so we go
to the blueprint of the menu. Specify WBP_LevelItem on the Graph tab and in the details panel.
Run it again.
We have created tiles as we specified in the array in GameInstance.
Open TestLevel. We open the level with the sphere.
We return to the main menu. We check that the level with the cube also opens. Everything works and note that
when we go to the main menu, the StartupLevel we have highlighted the very last
one we have selected. There are no navigation meshes on the test levels and therefore the characters
do not move, but we do not need this now. Let's also see how it works with the same
names, for example, rename CubeLevel to SphereLevel, that is, we have two levels with the same name.
And then the frame does not work correctly. We will not handle this situation, but let
me show additional meta information for a property that can display a hint in editor.
Add meta information to the property of the LevelsData array. The meta information is called a tooltip.
And assign it a string literal with a message that the names of the levels in the mass must be unique.
Let's see how it looks in editor.
When we hover over the property LevelsData, our message is shown to us, that is, it can be a hint for the
person who sets up this array, but ideally, of course, handle such situations using code.